[Music]
yes good morning I am looking forward to
the combined Q&A afterwards when I was
in Britain I learned the British had a
kind of approach to questions and the
answers the little different than ours I
was in a grad school seminar my first
year in Britain little
wet-behind-the-ears American grad
student there was a distinguished
professor of conti and philosophy that
came to our department he was giving
this extraordinary lecture I asked a
question in the middle because he was
talking about some things in consul Asif
II that I had never heard of and I asked
him if there was a bibliographical
source a book that I can read about that
aspect of Kant's philosophy I said you
know I'd never heard of that and
afterwards my supervisor took me aside
and said Maya he said I know in this
state you've learned that the only
stupid question is the one you didn't
ask and then he said it's different here
and he said if you're to succeed you
must learn to Bluff and he said everyone
here is bluffing if you're to succeed
you must learn to Bluff - so in future
if you have a question that reveals
ignorance
please come ask me privately he said we
will have an extended Q&A I'm gonna kind
of reveal the surprise right now we have
the astronomer Guillermo Gonzalez here
with us who is the co-author of
privileged planet and one of the real
luminaries in the intelligent design
movement he's going to help Jay and me
field questions on the subject of the
next two lectures I'm gonna be talking
about the beginning of the universe and
Jays gonna be a little bit about the
fine-tuning that you heard about from
Eric and then I'm gonna pass the baton
to Jay and he'll be talking more about
the fine-tuning and the priviledge
planet hypothesis and then we're gonna
bring Guillermo up and we will have this
extended Q&A and it will be American
rules no stupid questions okay all
questions are valid all right I'd like
to begin by talking a little bit more
about this media blackout
Eric Metaxas was talking about and I'm
having a little bit of difficulty as it
almost always happens with the
PowerPoint there we go Richard Dawkins
is one of those popularizers that we're
all we all encounter in that cultural
flood of information that Eric was
talking about here's a quotation that
has influenced Minh and many of his
so-called scientific atheists or the new
atheist movement they started publishing
books in 2007 and they've been monster
million sellers and this is a quote from
one of those books he says the universe
we observe has precisely the properties
we should expect if there is at bottom
no design no purpose no evil no good
nothing but blind pitiless indifference
you may remember that one of his first
best-selling books was the blind
watchmaker and Dawkins's argument runs
like this he says that science properly
understood undermines belief in God why
because before Darwin Darwin we knew
that the strongest argument for the
existence of God was always the evidence
of design in nature but when Darwin came
along we were able to explain that
appearance of design that illusion of
design as the result of a blind
undirected process called natural
selection acting on random variations
and now biologists would talk about
natural selection also acting on random
mutations but that undirected process
explains the appearance or illusion of
design so now we know there's no real
design only an illusion of design and
therefore there's no designer and if
there's no designer there's no God and
so he says if you want to believe in God
you're still free to do so is a sort of
subjective superstition he calls it the
god delusion but there's no objective
evidence for the reality of God and
that's one of those really powerful
cultural messages and I know having been
a professor this really profoundly has
affected a lot of students people in in
that pre post and college age years when
most of us form our worldviews in fact
there's a lot of polling data on this
that young people are losing their faith
in droves as they go to university many
of them do come back later many don't
science and the perception that there is
quote no scientific evidence for God is
one of the really powerful reasons for
that loss and a lot of that is coming
from this cultural messaging from these
folks we call the new atheists and also
the professor at who has been influenced
for over a century
by the rise of what we call scientific
materialism a worldview about which I'll
talk a bit more as the talk unfolds now
obviously this perspective that science
is in conflict with faith or that
science properly understood undermines
belief in God is very contrary to the
perspective of the biblical writers in
Psalm 19 in the Tanakh the Old Testament
the Hebrew Bible we encounter the idea
that the heavens are actually in some
way declaring or revealing the glory and
reality of God you get the same idea in
the New Testament st. Paul talks about
in Romans 1 this famous passage he he
says for since the creation of the world
God's invisible qualities his eternal
power and his divine nature sometimes in
the older translations of the Bible
translated wisdom have been clearly seen
being understood from what has been made
in other words if you look at nature
there's something about nature that not
only affirms the reality of God but
actually reveals something about the
qualities of the creator his power and
his wisdom is intelligence now this is
obviously a very different perspective
than that of the new atheist and I
suppose we shouldn't be too surprised
that the Bible writers and the new
atheist disagree about what nature can
tell us about the reality of God but
what might surprise you
is that the new atheist perspective on
what science can tell us about the
reality of God is diametrically opposed
to the perspective of the founders of
what we call modern science historians
of science talk about a period of time
from roughly 1300 to 1700 others dated
1500 to 1700 they call it the Scientific
Revolution
that's when science in its modern form
is an organized form of of inquiry an
investigation of nature really got going
and
think of that period of time we think
about the Giants of the Scientific
Revolution like Johannes Kepler the
great astronomer we think about Galileo
we think about Robert Boyle the the the
groundbreaking chemist and we think
about for example Sir Isaac Newton
here's a front piece of one of the early
works in biology late 17th century one
of the kind of really cutting-edge
pieces of biological research at that
period of time notice the front piece
the the the introductory page here
it's a paraphrase of the book of Romans
that that passage I just read the wisdom
of God manifested in the works of
creation there were a lot of them so it
was in two parts it was two big volumes
by John ray a fellow of the Royal
Society the first organized scientific
society in the world Ray like many of
the founders of science during this
period of time was a devout Christian
who believed that by studying nature he
was learning about the wisdom of God now
the scientists at this period of time
had had two key concepts that historians
of science have identified as crucial to
the rise of modern science one was the
idea of order and the idea there was
that nature is an orderly system they
would talk about the Concours of nature
an orderly system and it was it was
orderly because it reflected the mind of
God God was a God of order and he built
order into the world and therefore we
could perceive those patterns of order
which the early scientists called laws
of nature and they were laws because
there was a lawgiver it was a juridical
theological metaphor that suggested that
the order of nature was a manifestation
of the ongoing superintendent
superintending by God of his power over
nature I talked last night in the
interview with Eric about Newton's
notion of the laws of nature he thought
that he were a manifestation of constant
spirit action it was the Spirit of God
who imposed upon the the brute matter an
order that could be perceived by the
scientists which we describe
mathematically as laws of nature that
was one key idea from this pier
time the other was the idea perhaps even
more profound of intelligibility to most
of us without scientific training the
nature can look very chaotic hard to
discern what's going on it's not but the
early scientists had the conviction that
if they studied nature carefully that it
would reveal its secrets
it was intelligible to them because we
human beings are made in the image of
God God is a rational creator he built
rationality order and put design into
nature and because he built our minds as
well in His image we could perceive the
rationality the order and the design
that he built into the natural world and
so this made science possible and it
made this incredible flowering of
organized science possible in this in
Western Europe during this period of
time in a decidedly Christian milieu a
period when most of the leading
intellectuals had a if not a real
genuine faith a Christian worldview now
this perspective reached an almost
majestic quality in the writings of Sir
Isaac Newton I had an experience a
couple years ago several years ago now
where I was called to testify but for a
group called the United States
Commission on civil rights and they were
investigating whether or not there was
something called viewpoint
discrimination in the teaching of
biological origins when I got the the
invitation to testify I my first thought
was well I wouldn't have thought you
needed a hearing to establish that all
you have to do is open any college or
high school biology textbook and there's
only one perspective offered it's the
contemporary Darwinian perspective and
in the discussion or presentation of
evolutionary theory there is not in
these textbooks even oppression of some
of the contemporary critiques of for
example the creative power of the
mutation selection mechanism which many
evolutionary biologists now doubt but
not a mention of that so of course
there's viewpoint discrimination but in
any case the commissioners were
interested in my perspective as a
proponent of the theory of intelligent
design I came and gave a short testimony
and afterwards
one of the commissioners in the back row
I started asking kind of series of
aggressive questions that I thought were
meant to impeach my credibility he's
asking about where I did my PhD and what
did my would my supervisors have thought
of my perspective on ID blah blah blah
but then he said isn't your perspective
though very similar to that of a
Johannes Kepler and Robert Boyle and an
Isaac Newton some of the early founders
of modern science and I you know when I
heard the name of my heroes I my spirit
brightened and and I began to talk a
little bit about that and then my
opposite number at the hearing who was
there defending the Darwin only approach
to science education interjected and
said well what what dr. Maier is saying
is true Sir Isaac Newton was a very
religious man she said but he took great
pains to keep his religious ideas about
intelligent design notice how she
equated the two out of his scientific
work and I'm not one of these people
that memorizes poetry or even Bible
verses very readily but it happened that
I had in my briefcase with me an essay
that I'd finished just that week with a
paragraph a block quote from Isaac
Newton and it's the one that I have on
the on the screen behind me and I had it
nearly committed to memory
and so I found myself think something
that sounded very impressive I said well
but actually that's not true
in the general skolem to the Principia
dot-dot-dot general skolem just means
introduction but she didn't know that
neither did the commissioners and I so I
quoted this pretty pretty close to
verbatim let me share it with you
this is Newton he's talking about the
solar system he's presenting in the in
the Principia his theory of universal
gravitation but knowing how this law now
works he's got to mathematically
describe he's still amazed that the
solar system is as stable it has all
these stable planetary orbits because
he's aware of how there's this delicate
balancing of all the gravitational
forces and this is what he says though
these bodies the planets may indeed
continue in their orbits by the mere
laws of gravity yet they could by no
means have at first derived the regular
position of the orbits themselves from
those laws thus this most beautiful
system of Sun planets and comets could
only proceed from the council and
Dominion of an intelligent and powerful
being capital B and as I finished
paraphrasing the the commissioners in
the back of the the room I saw that
several smiles break across faces like
this could be a lot more interesting
than we thought you know I'm the I'm the
young upstart and here's the person
speaking for the scientific
establishment because whether or not the
commissioners were persuaded of my views
on intelligent design they realized that
as a matter of historical fact the
founders of modern science were very
favorable to this idea and they built it
into their scientific work it wasn't
something they they kept separate as a
theological proposition they thought
science itself was pointing to the
design of an intelligent and powerful
being now obviously that's a very big
shift in perspective from that of
Richard Dawkins and Neil deGrasse Tyson
and Bill Nye the Science Guy and all
these popularizers we've been hearing
about so how did we get from Dakin art
from Sir Isaac Newton to Richard Dawkins
that's it that's a big intellectual
shift and there's a there's a story to
be told about this in intellectual
history or scientific history in it it
really begins in the
18th century or the and there's a kind
of a series of scientific ideas that
come about that end up producing that
worldview shift in some ways it starts
with another physicist named Pierre
Laplace he in 1799 Newton dies in 1727
the Principia is 1687 so about a century
later 1799 Laplace writes this book
called the celestial mechanics and in in
the celestial mechanics he attempts to
do what Newton in that previous
quotation said you couldn't do which was
explained the origin of the solar system
purely by reference to the law of
gravity and some clustering of nebula
nebula gases
he doesn't Newton thought it was a setup
job he thought it was finely tuned
somehow there that God had designed the
solar system Laplace tries to dispense
with that idea he's brought before
Napoleon a few years later to receive
commendation for this important book and
according to the story as it's told
Napoleon asks him you know wonderful
book we're glad you showed up the
British but I know that Newton used to
write a lot about God and his scientific
works but you don't why is that and he
as said to have puffed himself up and
said seer I have no need of his that
hypothesis that was my French accent
sorry about that part this now is one of
those things that historians of science
debate about whether this conversation
actually happened
some say it's apocryphal others not
whatever is the case it certainly
captured the spirit of the age and the
spirit of the coming age especially in
the 19th century one by one there were
theories that that came online that
[Music]
disputed the idea that there was any
evidence of design in nature and that
instead purely undirected natural
processes could explain all the origin
of all the things we see around us so we
have this account of Laplace of the
solar system then in geology we have
some very reasonable explanations but
relying on on purely undirected unguided
processes to explain the origin the
mountain ranges in the canyon
and the great geological features and
then in biology we have of course
darwin's great theory 1859 the Origin of
Species he attempts to explain the
origin of all the new forms of life as a
result of unguided undirected processes
in particular natural selection acting
on random variations his idea is
extended first bite he doesn't himself
to explain the origin even of human
beings in his book The Descent of Man
and then other early evolutionary
theorists urns tackle and thomas henry
huxley extend the idea in the other
direction to account for the origin of
the first self-replicating so by the end
of the 19th century you have this
seamless completely naturalistic
completely materialistic story from the
origin back very far back to explain the
origin of the solar system to planet
earth to the features on planet earth to
the first life to all the new forms of
life finally to the human life and so
this is a completely materialistic
account and as a result of this by the
end of the 19th century you don't just
have a series of theories about origins
sorry for the rhyme but you also have
something like a comprehensive worldview
developing and scholars call this this
worldview scientific materialism how
many are familiar with the term
worldview okay that's that's really good
it's getting into wider currency when I
was in college I was a physics and earth
science major I majored in both fields
and one of the reasons I did the science
stuff was my dad was a mechanical
engineer when I went off to college I
knew I didn't want to be an engineer
whenever he was fixing the engine in the
car and he had me help I dropped the the
wrench in the most inaccessible place
and and he go like you know because I
was thinking about other things and so
he said before I went to college II said
look son I know you don't want to be an
engineer you don't have to follow me in
my footsteps
but before you choose a major please
take at least two years of college math
because if you don't have that math
under your belt you're gonna be limited
in what you can you know what you can do
and I said okay sure dad
don't have to be an engineer I'll do
anything I'll take the path so I get
done with the two years of college math
and about all you can major in at this
at the liberal arts college where I was
attending was physics and physics was
about as close to engineering as you
could get in the college where I was and
I think my dad got what he wanted you
know so this is awesome but I was always
sneaking across campus to sign up for
one philosophy class every year cuz he
heard the interview last night I was
always interested in these these deep Y
questions and one semester I was taking
a course called atheistic existentialism
it was my junior year and it was all
about Nietzsche and Sartre and Camus and
they depressed you know God is dead a
theistic existentialist writers and
anguish for larnice and despair and I
was doing really really well at the
despair part and I got an A in this
class and the great slip came home at
Christmastime we have this kind of
Germanic work ethic thing in our family
even as a college student my dad is
intercepting the report card
and so one night he says you know I'd
like to have a little chat and we're
sitting at dinner and he says yeah it's
the great slip out and he starts reading
the grades and the first one is
atheistic and he says atheistic
atheistic what in the blank he says is
atheistic what am i stench ilysm he says
and then he pauses for effect and it
reads it and this is a like that's a bad
thing and then the next grade is
theoretical mechanics and as my most
important physics class that term in it
he reads it B and then he gives me this
look like it is now time for offspring
to give a count of offsprings behavior
and and I start getting really defensive
and I say dad dad dad look I know these
philosophy classes don't mean anything
to you but they're important too because
that's where you learn about about
worldviews and about what people are
thinking at that deep level and
everybody has a worldview it's kind of
like a personal philosophy and it
informs your perspective on other issues
and then it and if you understand
people's worldview you can understand
where they're coming from and why they
use the terms they do and he interrupts
when he says son you don't need a
worldview
you need a job and now I'm one of those
dads you know so III get that now and my
dad being a mechanical engineer is
actually now really excited about what
we're doing on intelligent design but it
took a while and anyway the point is
worldview is very important it is a kind
of a good way of thinking of a worldview
is it's a personal philosophy that
everyone has whether they know it or not
and world use answer some very
fundamental questions about reality not
not questions like what is the formula
for for salt or who won the World Series
but deeper questions like what is the
thing or the entity or the process from
which everything else comes in fact I
see that in people who write about
worldview that they call that the prime
reality question the most important
question and the dominant worldview in
our elite knowledge culture today is
this worldview that I would just mention
called materialism or sometimes called
naturalism the idea nature is all there
is there's nothing beyond it nature made
of matter and energy and so if you're
familiar scripturally with something
like the prologue to the book of john
where it says in the beginning was the
word or from back to Genesis in the
beginning God said you know there's the
idea in the theistic worldview that what
is the prime reality is a personal God
with a mind of creative intentions who
brings the universe into existence and
then through his intellectual power
shapes matter to to create and generate
all the things we see around us the
materialistic worldview you know sort of
the flipside of that ja9
prologue says from eternity past where
the particles there was no beginning the
thing that is eternal in self existence
is matter in energy and that matter and
energy arranged itself to become more
complex stuff more complex living stuff
eventually and the living stuff evolved
by Darwinian processes is to prove to
all the new forms of life we see
including one form of life namely us who
conceived of the idea of God and so you
have God in the materialistic worldview
but only as a concept and only at the
end of the process in the theistic
worldview the whole thing is reversed
you start with God then you get matter
and then
you get all the wonderful things we see
around us as a result of God's
creativity so these two worldviews are
in a kind of ideological conflict and
the conflict between science and faith
is not a conflict between scientific
evidence in faith it's really a conflict
between these two worldviews one of
which claims to be based on science but
I'm gonna suggest that maybe that's not
actually the case the bad news for
people of faith is that this
materialistic worldview really does
dominate the culture now the elite
culture the the universities many of the
elite science research institutions the
law schools the courts students who are
of faith know this when they get to
those places they know they got to kind
of keep quiet because this is theirs
their view is not the dominant view but
there's there's a good news and that's
what I'd like to talk about this morning
and that is that the science of the 19th
century that gave rise to this
perspective has been eclipsed by major
developments in science over the last
100 years in three main areas cosmology
physics and biology let me talk first
about the the cosmology or the astronomy
the shift in this field starts in the
1920s
there's a now famous astronomer named
Edwin Hubble most of us have heard of
him because of the famed Hubble
telescope it's kind of a bummer for him
because he's a really great scientist he
got a telescope named after him and it's
always broken and they have to go up
there and fix it but anyway
Hubble starts working in the 20s he
comes out of law the field of law into
astronomy at a really propitious time
they're building these great domed
telescopes this is the hundred inch
diameter telescope at Mount Wilson that
Hubble used and using these great big
telescopes the astronomers are able to
at this time to start resolving these
onto photographic plates the light
coming from little tiny distance
previously indistinct points of light in
the night sky and it turns out that
these little indistinct points once the
light is collected over with a long
exposure on a photographic plate through
these big telescopic lenses the light
starts revealing structure and this is a
picture of what's called a spindle
nebula and there were others
spiral nebulas and oh that sorry that
was a well that's a spiral and here's
another spiral nebula
now this reignited a debate that had
been going on in astronomy between
astronomers who thought that our Milky
Way galaxy was the only galaxy and other
astronomers who thought that there were
other galaxies beyond the Milky Way
Island universes if you will beyond the
Milky Way and this was called the great
debate in the 1920s but in 1924 Hubble
was able to settle this debate by using
some new techniques for estimating
distances he was able to deduce to
determine that the Andromeda nebula was
actually the Andromeda galaxy that it
was a separate galaxy in the way he was
able to show that as he was using these
new techniques for measuring distances
he determined that the Andromeda galaxy
when the closest ones to us was 900
thousand light years away that was his
estimate at the time and we the
astronomers thought at the time the
Milky Way was only 300 thousand
light-years across so clearly it had to
be way beyond the Milky Way therefore it
was a separate galaxy and the Andromeda
nebula which this meant gas cloud was
renamed the Andromeda galaxy that was
pretty awesome
and as they began to look at other
points of light using these same
techniques they found that there were
galaxies in every direction of the night
sky in fact if you look at this little
square that's highlighted on the
PowerPoint that's like a little tiny
part of the visual field maybe like a
diamond arm's length and now if we were
to
magnify that it reveals galaxies galore
in even the tiniest little quadrant in
the night sky is and and the current
estimate is that there are about 200
billion galaxies in the visible universe
so in just the space of a decade our
sense of the the immensity of the
universe was just magnified incredibly
now that was really and that was an
amazing discovery but even more
important was what was discovered as a
result of the light coming from these
galaxies turns out that the light was
redder than than the scientists
expected you don't have you if you shine
light through a prism and it separates
into colors the red through to the blue
and the violet and the red light has a
long wavelength and if an object is is
emitting light and moving away it will
cause the wavelength of the light to
stretch out and it will look redder than
it would otherwise look so the the the
light coming from the the the gases in
the far away galaxies looked redder than
similar light would look coming from if
we looked at it spectra in the spectra
in a laboratory and they call this the
redshift in other words the wavelength
was stretched out it's kinda like the
the Doppler shift was sound when if a
train whistle goes by goes hmm sound
well that's the wavelength of the sound
stretching out same thing happens with
light and so the scientists were able to
discern that the galaxies are actually
moving away from us that's what the
redshift meant now that had incredible
implications for the question of the
origin of the universe itself Hubble
used data from a a unsung hero in
astronomy named Vesto Slipher to about
this redshift and so here's here's the
here's the implication of all this if
the galaxies are moving away from us in
every direction in the forward direction
of time the only way that could be true
is if there is a kind of spherically
symmetric expansion of the universe that
everything is expanding in the forward
direction so if we think of I got a
visual aid in the forward direction of
time you have the universe getting
bigger bigger and bigger and the
galaxies every galaxies getting further
and further away from every other galaxy
but if you wind the time clock backwards
if you back extrapolate when you think
well what was the universe like a
hundred years ago or a thousand years
ago or a million or a billion or however
far back you go eventually you get to
the point where all that galactic
material is going to congeal or would
have come back to the same point a point
marking the beginning of the expansion
of the universe and arguably the
beginning of the universe itself
and so we have from observational
astronomy the first hint that the
universe has not been here
eternally it's not eternal in
self-existent but rather it had a
beginning this is one of Hubble's plot
showing that that there was a law that
further out the galaxies are the faster
they're moving away and that again can
only be true if it's Minerva's expanding
in this spherically symmetric way now
about this time actually a little before
this time there is a famous physicist
with really bad hair who had come to the
a very similar conclusion and this was
Albert Einstein he he was in the
19-teens still working in germany
eventually he came to Princeton to
escape the Nazis but in the teens he
came up with another theory at a new
theory of gravity known as general
relativity and we talked a little bit
about this last night but it's basically
the the conceptual idea behind it is
that matter causes space to bend such
that other matter passing through that
space will have its motion changed by
that preferred by those preferred lines
of trajectory so as a result of this
he's thinking well if matter causes
space to bend then that means that if
all you have in the universe is that
gravitational field then everything
should be collapsed onto itself into
something like a black hole but we don't
live in a universe like that we live in
a universe where there's massive bodies
separated by empty space so there must
be some counter beaming force of
expansion to to counter to offset the
gravitational force which means that the
universe must be in some way dynamic
there's something pushing outward but if
some pushing outwards then that would
imply that there could have been a
beginning and that troubled Einstein
because at this point his career was
different later but at this point his
career he was very much a scientific
materialist
and so he posited something it was kind
of a fairly arbitrary conjecture on his
part but he proposed that this outward
pushing force which
the cosmological constant had exactly
the right magnitude so that the outward
push was conspire gravitational poll and
you had a universe that was static now
they're expanding nor contracting it was
kind of a contrived value that he
assigned to this but it worked to
eliminate the idea of a beginning and
for time for him that was a sigh of
relief but then in the 20s of physicists
started working with these equations and
they realized you know that's pretty
contrived Einstein that would be an
incredible degree of fine-tuning to have
that cosmological constant with exactly
the value that you you Einstein chose
for it the math allows a lot of other
values that would imply most other
values would apply a dynamic universe
that's thing one and then this amazing
physicist a belgian catholic priest
named father LaMotte ro is with einstein
at a conference in the 20s and they're
in a taxicab ride going to the the
conference and ylim entre tells einstein
first of all your physics is contrived
the equations really suggest a dynamic
universe you know and we know it but
also have you heard about this redshift
data that Hubble's working with out in
California because it's showing that the
dynamic expanding universe is really
what the heavens have talked back in
fact in fact and Einstein was listen to
la mantra and eventually made his way
out at Hubble's invitation to Pasadena
California and had a peak for himself
through the hooker hundred inch
telescope and came out and announced to
the media after seeing this in his heavy
German accent he came out and said I now
Z is a necessity off a beginning and
later and explained that the value is
arbitrary value he chose for the
cosmological constant was the greatest
mistake of a scientific career because
he allowed his philosophical
presuppositions his predilections to
determine his scientific theory rather
than letting the evidence decide the
question
and anyways a great moment in the
history of science it established what
is now known as the Big Bang Theory when
you have this convergence of theoretical
physics general relativity with
observational astronomy and that in turn
established that the universe had a
beginning now Einstein was not the only
the only scientist at the time who
didn't like this Sir Arthur Eddington a
famous British astrophysicists said this
he said philosophically the notion of a
beginning of the present order is
repugnant to me I should like to find a
genuine loophole I simply do not believe
that present order of things started off
with a bang the expanding universe is
preposterous it leaves me cold he said
this in psychology is known as the
theory of denial no you notice what the
evidence he's citing he's not fighting
it he says philosophically he doesn't
like it and later physicists you know
kept asking what's the big deal why our
physicist said about the idea of a
beginning
Princeton physicist Robert Dicke put it
this way he said he said an infinitely
old universe would relieve us of the
necessity of
explaining the origin of matter at any
finite time in the past it matter itself
comes into existence then you can't
invoke matter as the cause of the origin
of the material universe you need
something that is immaterial that
transcends matter and this conclusion
was highlighted later in the 1960s by
some work by Stephen Hawking there's a
bigger story here that I'm compressing
and maybe with Guillermo we can talk a
bit more about it there were after the
Big Bang was proposed there were some
other models proposed the steady-state
model the oscillating universe model
these each attempts to preserve an
infinite universe that didn't have a
beginning but one by one as more
observations of different kinds came
online in astronomy these were set aside
as inadequate theories and then in the
in the mid-60s there was an
extraordinary development in theoretical
physics
Stephen Hawking probably know of him
wonderful
inspiring figure you know the physicists
confined to a wheelchair with the ALS
disease when he's working as a PhD
student he's working on black hole
physics and he's aware of the way that
you know matter causes the space to
curve and he begins to you know he's
thinking okay that's what's going on
with the black hole there's so much
matter it's curved so tightly you can't
get anything out but he starts to apply
this idea to the universe and he's
realizing that is the universe is going
forward in time the matter is getting
more and more dispersed but as you wind
that clock backwards again in your
mind's eye you eventually get to a point
where the matter is so tightly curved or
the matter so densely compact that space
is getting tighter and tighter more
tightly curved in its curvature and
eventually the mathematics something
called the field equations of general
relativity which he and Roger Penrose
solved imply that there is an infinite
curvature at some point in the finite
past now an infinite curvature
corresponds to zero spatial volume and
then you have to ask what we discussed
last night how much stuff can you put in
no space and the answer is well no
things go in no space I mean it's and so
this singularity theorem has this
profoundly anti-materialistic
implication and it happens that Hawking
worked for much of the rest of his life
to try to as WC Fields put it he was
looking for a loophole you know he was
looking for a way around this conclusion
Hawking was a really interesting figure
he was a kind of theologically sensitive
even you could say God obsessed atheist
and so he was aware of what he'd shown
in 1968 with Penrose but then he was
developing other other ideas one called
quantum cosmology which we can discuss
in the Q&A in which I discuss it length
in my new book trying to find a way
around this this conclusion but the
straightforward application of general
relativity to the origin of the universe
implies a creation event and we'll have
a little quiz on these equations
afterwards but anyway this is the
curvature goes to an infinite zero
spatial volume the astronomer Robert
Jastrow said this is an exceedingly
strange development unexpected by
all but the theologians he's writing in
the 80s and notice our starting point
remember I start my starting point with
Dawkins he said that the universe is
exactly as we should expect if there's
nothing but blind pitiless indifference
but these astronomers say no this is
totally unexpected from a materialistic
standpoint but it was expected by the
theologians and Jastrow went on to say
for the scientists whose lived by his
faith in the power of reason the story
ends like a bad dream he scaled the
mountains of ignorance he's about to
conquer the highest peak and as he pulls
himself up over the final rock he's
greeted by a band of theologians who
have been sitting there for centuries
entirely expecting that the universe
would have a beginning because after all
in in the the biblical witness you had
the first very first words are in the
beginning Arno Penzias one of the
leading physicists who have played a big
role in this story in refuting what's
called a steady state theory with his
work on what's called a cosmic
background radiation put it this way he
said the best day do we have concerning
the Big Bang are exactly what I would
have predicted had I nothing to go on
but the five books of Moses the Psalms
and the Bible as a whole
and indeed it is rather striking the
first words of the Bible are in the
beginning in the epistles in the New
Testament there are two different
mentions of the plan of God existing
before the beginning of time which is
really striking in light of relativity
theory because the singularity theorem
implies that time itself is a created
entity which has a beginning and there's
even mentions 11 or 12 separate mentions
in the Tanakh the Hebrew Bible of God
stretching out the heavens either having
stretched or stretching out the heavens
so the this new cosmology is in a way
very much expected on this from the
standpoint of theism
it also helps revive an ancient argument
for the existence of God that went like
this everything that begins to exist
must have a cause the universe began to
exist and the universe therefore must
have a cause separate from itself all
causes are separate from their effects
we call that transcendent or separate
cause God now I developed this argument
in a little different way in my
new book on the return of the god
hypothesis using a method of reasoning
known as inference to the best
explanation or if you have an historical
event you try to explain it by reference
to all the possible causes you could
consider and then you examine those
causes to see which one are causally
adequate or sufficient to explain the
effect and if you find causes that
aren't sufficient you one-by-one
eliminate them and in the best case you
elect that one cause which is which has
the powers or is known to produce the
effect in question when what I've done
in the book is I apply this not to
scientific hypotheses but to the
different worldview hypotheses with
respect to the origin of the universe
I look at materialism and materialism
has this problem if matter itself comes
into existence a finite time ago in the
past then there's no matter before that
to do the causing it's an inadequate
cause it's not causally adequate
pantheism has the same problem because
it equates God and matter it says that
God is in all the material things around
us that's the Eastern philosophy but and
God in matter are coextensive so before
there was matter there was there before
man if the universe the material
universe had a beginning before that
there was neither matter nor God and so
pantheism also lacks a separate cause
separate from the universe that could
bring it into existence it lacks
transcendence theism on the other hand
posits a God that's independent of the
universe and therefore can provide a
causally adequate explanation for the
origin of the universe from something
else because there is a something else
there's a transcendent entity of great
power who could bring the universe into
existence it happens that deism also
posits a transcendent entity and as we
talked about last night the question
between deism and theism would be is
there any evidence of design after the
beginning of the universe but both deism
and theism could account for the origin
of the universe in my reckoning and so
applying this method we end up with
something like this a God hypothesis of
some kind now in my book and Jay will
talk a bit more about the fine-tuning
but there are all always counter
arguments to good theistic arguments and
one of the ways you assess how good
argument is is how well it sustains its
strength in the face of counter
arguments or critique and one of the the
big counter arguments today against this
cosmological argument that I'm
developing is Hawking's new idea that he
developed after the singularity theorem
called quantum cosmology and that's just
the idea that the laws of that when the
universe is very small quantum physics
can describe the universe in that early
state and those quantum laws would make
our universe in some way expected and he
has a famous quotation from the last
major book he published before he died
where he says because there is a law
such as gravity and he's talking about a
law of quantum gravity the universe can
and will create itself from nothing
spontaneous creation is the reason there
is something rather than nothing why the
universe exists and why we exist now
there's a whole lot to say about this I
get into this in great detail in the new
book and we'll talk about in the Q&A if
you like as well but you can see just
from this quotation there's a
fundamental confusion underlying this
whole enterprise Hawking was a great
physicist and a subpar philosopher and
this is just really bad philosophy the
laws of physics describe what matter and
energy do in relation to each other once
you have them they don't describe where
matter and energy come from okay they
describe what matter and energy do what
stuff does but they don't explain what
where stuff came from so this is what
what you call a category error and it
runs all the way through Hawking's work
on quantum cosmology as well as
popularizers like Lawrence Krauss --is
so we can talk more about that in the QA
I discussed all of this in my new book
the return of the god hypothesis and but
I think you can see just in conclusion
that Dawkins is bold assertion that
universe looks as we would expect from
the standpoint of a materialistic
worldview is patently false it looks
exactly as we would expect from a
theistic point of view and people have
to come up with really abstract
cosmological a speculative cosmological
ideas like quantum cosmology and
multiverses to get around things like
the fine-tuning and the evidence for a
definite beginning to the universe thank
you very much
[Music]